gh-124210: Add introduction to `threading` docs (#127046)
python/cpython: Doc/library/threading.rst

**Source code:** :source:`Lib/threading.py`

--------------

> 

Reviewer: This was added on purpose, in all docs that use the `Source code:` line. Please restore, and in general be more cautious about removing things 🙂

Author: it's not removed but moved, it's still there, above Introduction.
should I add one or move the existing one?

Reviewer: Keep it here!

Author: :+1: moved it back

--------------

Introduction
------------

The :mod:`threading` module provides a way to run multiple threads (smaller
units of a process) concurrently within a single process. It allows for the
creation and management of threads, making it possible to execute tasks in
parallel, sharing memory space. Threads are particularly useful when tasks are

> I/O-bound, such as reading from or writing to files, or making network requests,

Reviewer 2: This caught me off guard. Typically, threads are for speeding up CPU bound operations, and something like `asyncio` is for I/O bound tasks. Threads being more efficient for I/O bound tasks is really only because of the GIL, but we're trying to get rid of that anyway.

where much of the time is spent waiting for external resources.

Unlike the :mod:`multiprocessing` module, which uses separate processes to
bypass the :term:`Global Interpreter Lock <global interpreter lock>`, the
threading module operates within a single process, meaning that all threads

> share the same memory space. However, the GIL limits the performance gains of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
share the same memory space. However, the :term:`GIL` limits the performance gains of
```

Reviewer 2: We should also mention that this is specific to CPython.

> threading when it comes to CPU-bound tasks, as only one thread can execute

Reviewer 2: Ah, here we are about CPU bound tasks. I think we should mention the experimental free-threaded builds here.

Author: I added mention

> Python bytecode at a time. Despite this, threading remains a useful tool for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python bytecode at a time. Despite this, threads remain a useful tool for
```

achieving concurrency in many scenarios.

A typical use case for :mod:`threading` includes managing a pool of worker
threads that can process multiple tasks concurrently.  This basic example of
creating and starting threads using :class:`~threading.Thread`::

   import threading
   import time

   def crawl(link, delay=3):
       print(f"crawl started for {link}")
       time.sleep(delay)
       print(f"crawl ended for {link}")

   links = [
       "https://example.com",
       "https://another-example.com",
       "https://yet-another-example.com"
   ]

   # Start threads for each link
   threads = []
   for link in links:
       # Using `args` to pass positional arguments and `kwargs` for keyword arguments
       t = threading.Thread(target=crawl, args=(link,), kwargs={"delay": 2})
       threads.append(t)
       t.start()

   # Wait for all threads to finish
   for t in threads:
       t.join()

> This module constructs higher-level threading interfaces on top of the lower

Reviewer 2: I think it looks kind of weird having all this technical information below the introduction. This, and the parts below it down to the note about WASI compatibility, should ideally go before the introduction.

Author: I looked at `multiprocessing.rst` as a reference and it's in the same order:
```rst
Introduction
------------
Common info about module

   python code example
```

or you mean information about `This module constructs higher-level threading interfaces ...` needs to be moved before `Introduction`?

Reviewer 2: > or you mean information about This module constructs higher-level threading interfaces ... needs to be moved before Introduction?

Yeah, as well as the stuff about compatibility, `versionadded`, and whatnot.

Author: like this?
📚 Documentation preview 📚: https://cpython-previews--127046.org.readthedocs.build/en/127046/library/threading.html#introduction

This module constructs higher-level threading interfaces on top of the lower
level :mod:`_thread` module.

.. include:: ../includes/wasm-notavail.rst

Introduction
------------

> The :mod:`threading` module provides a way to run multiple `threads

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The :mod:`!threading` module provides a way to run multiple `threads
```

> Do not use a link when the link would point to the current unit. It’s natural to use the name of a function in the documentation for the function, but a link on that function name that simply reloads the section the user is already reading is useless and distracting.

https://devguide.python.org/documentation/style-guide/#links

<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_(computing)>`_ (smaller
units of a process) concurrently within a single process. It allows for the
creation and management of threads, making it possible to execute tasks in
parallel, sharing memory space. Threads are particularly useful when tasks are

> I/O-bound, such as file operations or making network requests,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
I/O bound, such as file operations or making network requests,
```

where much of the time is spent waiting for external resources.

> A typical use case for :mod:`threading` includes managing a pool of worker

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A typical use case for :mod:`!threading` includes managing a pool of worker
```

.. include:: ../includes/wasm-notavail.rst

Introduction
------------

The :mod:`threading` module provides a way to run multiple threads (smaller

> units of a process) concurrently within a single process. It allows for the

Reviewer 2: Instead of trying to define threads in a tiny parenthesis, it *might* be worth just adding a hyperlink to the Wikipedia page for threads or something like that. It's fine to keep it as-is if you want, though.

creation and management of threads, making it possible to execute tasks in
parallel, sharing memory space. Threads are particularly useful when tasks are

> I/O-bound, such as reading from or writing to files, or making network requests,

Reviewer 2: This comma hurts clarity, so let's just shorten it:
```suggestion
I/O-bound, such as file operations or making network requests,
```

where much of the time is spent waiting for external resources.

Unlike the :mod:`multiprocessing` module, which uses separate processes to
bypass the :term:`Global Interpreter Lock <global interpreter lock>`, the
threading module operates within a single process, meaning that all threads
share the same memory space. However, the :term:`GIL` limits the performance gains of
threading when it comes to CPU-bound tasks, as only one thread can execute
Python bytecode at a time. Despite this, threads remain a useful tool for

> achieving concurrency in many scenarios.

Reviewer 2: Note that the GIL is a CPython implementation detail. We *could* just add a "this only applies to CPython" phrase, but that might make things too hard to follow. I'd suggest splitting this into two sections:

- One section titled "Introduction" as you already have it, containing the first paragraph and then the example below this paragraph.
- A second section below entitled "The GIL" (or something along those lines), and then move this paragraph to that section.

Author: I called second section "GIL and Performance Considerations"

*(Experimental free-threaded builds of CPython disable the GIL, enabling true

> parallel execution of threads, but this feature is still under development.)*

Reviewer 2: - I don't think this should be italicized. 
- The phrase "experimental" already implies "under development."
- We should use some terms and link PEP-703.
```suggestion
As of Python 3.13, experimental :term:`free-threaded <free threading>` builds can disable the GIL, enabling true parallel execution of threads, but this feature is not available by default. (See :pep:`703`.)
```

A typical use case for :mod:`threading` includes managing a pool of worker
threads that can process multiple tasks concurrently.  This basic example of
creating and starting threads using :class:`~threading.Thread`::

   import threading
   import time

   def crawl(link, delay=3):
       print(f"crawl started for {link}")

>        time.sleep(delay)

Reviewer 2: A comment to clarify would be good:
```suggestion
       time.sleep(delay)  # Blocking I/O, simulating a network request
```

       print(f"crawl ended for {link}")

   links = [

>        "https://example.com",
>        "https://another-example.com",
>        "https://yet-another-example.com"

Reviewer 2: I always like example URLs to be real. I'll just suggest using Python ones for now, but feel free to have some fun with them.
```suggestion
       "https://python.org",
       "https://docs.python.org",
       "https://peps.python.org"
```

   ]

   # Start threads for each link
   threads = []
   for link in links:
       # Using `args` to pass positional arguments and `kwargs` for keyword arguments
       t = threading.Thread(target=crawl, args=(link,), kwargs={"delay": 2})
       threads.append(t)

>        t.start()

Reviewer 2: It's generally more common to want to start all threads at once, rather than incrementally as `Thread` objects are created. I'd arrange it into a new loop, but I'm not married to this suggestion:

```suggestion

    # Start each thread
    for t in threads:
       t.start()
```

.. include:: ../includes/wasm-notavail.rst

Introduction
------------

> The :mod:`threading` module provides a way to run multiple threads (smaller

Reviewer 2: Thinking out loud: maybe we want to link to a Wikipedia page (or some other external reference) on threads? That's probably better to someone clueless rather than "smaller units of a process."

Author: I added link to [wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_(computing))

units of a process) concurrently within a single process. It allows for the
creation and management of threads, making it possible to execute tasks in
parallel, sharing memory space. Threads are particularly useful when tasks are
I/O-bound, such as file operations or making network requests,
where much of the time is spent waiting for external resources.

A typical use case for :mod:`threading` includes managing a pool of worker

> threads that can process multiple tasks concurrently.  This basic example of

Reviewer 2: "this" makes it a dependent clause. It should be independent:
```suggestion
threads that can process multiple tasks concurrently.  Here's a basic example of
```

.. include:: ../includes/wasm-notavail.rst

Introduction

> ------------

Reviewer: What do you think of writing this intro _before_ the pile of directives above?

Author: as far as I know accessibility directives should be at the top so i don't think we can move `Introduction` higher

Reviewer: But here we have a change note, see also, naming note, implementation details which should all be after the simple intro.

Author: done. I like that now the implementation details about GIL are located next to the section about GIL

   ]

   # Start threads for each link
   threads = []
   for link in links:
       # Using `args` to pass positional arguments and `kwargs` for keyword arguments
       t = threading.Thread(target=crawl, args=(link,), kwargs={"delay": 2})
       threads.append(t)

    # Start each thread
    for t in threads:
       t.start()

   # Wait for all threads to finish
   for t in threads:
       t.join()

GIL and Performance Considerations
----------------------------------

Unlike the :mod:`multiprocessing` module, which uses separate processes to
bypass the :term:`Global Interpreter Lock <global interpreter lock>`, the
threading module operates within a single process, meaning that all threads
share the same memory space. However, the :term:`GIL` limits the performance
gains of threading when it comes to CPU-bound tasks, as only one thread can
execute Python bytecode at a time. Despite this, threads remain a useful tool
for achieving concurrency in many scenarios.

As of Python 3.13, experimental :term:`free-threaded <free threading>` builds
can disable the :term:`GIL`, enabling true parallel execution of threads, but
this feature is not available by default. (See :pep:`703`.)

> This module defines the following functions:

Reviewer: I think a heading should be added before starting this section. At the moment we’re still in the GIL section!

Author: thank you, but it's hard for me to find a suitable heading with my poor English.
what about adding `Reference` header like for [multiprocessing doc](https://docs.python.org/dev/library/multiprocessing.html#reference)
and make the following headings subheadings of this part?

   However, threading is still an appropriate model if you want to run
   multiple I/O-bound tasks simultaneously.

> GIL and Performance Considerations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
GIL and performance considerations
```
And we have a mix of headers on this page, I suggest updating the others to use sentence case as well.

https://devguide.python.org/documentation/style-guide/#capitalization

----------------------------------

Unlike the :mod:`multiprocessing` module, which uses separate processes to

> bypass the :term:`Global Interpreter Lock <global interpreter lock>`, the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
bypass the :term:`global interpreter lock` (GIL), the
```

threading module operates within a single process, meaning that all threads

> share the same memory space. However, the :term:`GIL` limits the performance

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
share the same memory space. However, the GIL limits the performance
```

gains of threading when it comes to CPU-bound tasks, as only one thread can
execute Python bytecode at a time. Despite this, threads remain a useful tool
for achieving concurrency in many scenarios.

As of Python 3.13, experimental :term:`free-threaded <free threading>` builds

> can disable the :term:`GIL`, enabling true parallel execution of threads, but

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
can disable the GIL, enabling true parallel execution of threads, but
```

> this feature is not available by default. (See :pep:`703`.)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
this feature is not available by default (see :pep:`703`).
```

---

At some point this will become default (possibly in [3.14](https://peps.python.org/pep-0779/)?) so whenever that occurs we'll have to try and remember to fix it. Or wait for the bug report :)

Author: I added comment:
```rst
.. TODO: At some point this feature will become available by default.
```
I think when someone changes the default build they might go to this document and stumble upon a comment so there is a higher chance that they will not forget to correct this paragraph

Reviewer 2: > At some point this will become default (possibly in [3.14](https://peps.python.org/pep-0779/)?)

Woah, what? I thought PEP 779 was supposed to get rid of the "experimental" in "experimental free-threading build," not make it the default.

Reviewer 3: Of course, that's right, the default would be a later release 😅
